==========
NCBI GENE 
==========

README 
======
ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/DATA/README

entrez
------
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query/static/entrezlinks.html#gene

------------

TABLES
======
* `gene2pubmed`_
* `mim2gene_medgen`_
* `gene2go`_ 

* `gene_info`_
* `gene_group`_ 
* `gene_history`_

* `gene2accession`_
* `gene_stopwords`_ 



------------

gene2pubmed
================== 
`tax_id`_ | `GeneID`_ | `PMID`_
::

   logical equivalent of what is reported as Gene/PubMed 
   Links visible in Gene's and PubMed's Links menus. 

   Although gene2pubmed is re-calculated daily,
   some of the source documents (GeneRIFs, for example) are not
   updated that frequently, so timing depends on the update
   frequency of the data source.

   Documentation about how these links are maintained
   is provided here:

   http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query/static/entrezlinks.html#gene


PMID
------
**PubMed** citation number. 

------------

mim2gene_medgen
================== 
`MIM`_ | `GeneID`_ | `MIM_type`_ | `MIM_vocab`_ | `MedGenCUI`_ 
::

   Report of the relationship between MIM numbers (OMIM), 
   GeneIDs, and Records in MedGen

   Tax_id is not included because this file is relevant only for
   human, tax_id 9606.


MIM
-----------------
**OMIM** MIM number associated with a GeneID


MIM_type
-----------------
::

   Type of relationship between the MIM number and GeneID 
   
   'gene'      the MIM number associated with a Gene, 
               or a GeneID that is assigned to a record
   
   where the molecular basis of the disease is not known
   
   'phenotype' the MIM number associated with a disease
               that is associated with a gene



|
MIM_vocab
-----------------
::
   
   This value is provided only when there is a report of a relationship
   between a MIM number that is a phenotype, and a GeneID.
   The current expected values are GeneMap (from OMIM), GeneReviews, 
   and NCBI.

|
MedGenCUI
-----------------
::
   
   The accession assigned by MedGen to this phenotype.  If the accession starts
   with a C followed by integers, the identifier is a concept ID (CUI) from UMLS.
   http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/

   If it starts with a CN, no CUI in UMLS was identified, and NCBI placeholder

------------

gene2go
================== 
`tax_id`_ | `GeneID`_ | `Symbol`_ | `GO_id`_ | `GO_evidence`_ | `GO_qualifier`_ | `GO_term`_ | `PMID`_ | `GO_category`_
::

   GO terms that have been associated
   with Genes in Entrez Gene.

   It is generated by processing the gene_association files
   on the GO ftp site: 
   http://www.geneontology.org/GO.current.annotations.shtml

   and comparing the DB_Object_ID to annotation in Gene,
   as also reported in gene_info.gz

   Multiple gene_associations file may be used for any genome.
   If so, duplicate information is not reported; but unique
   contributions of GO terms, evidence codes, and citations are.


GO_id
-----------------
GO **Gene Ontology** ID 

GO_term
-----------------
GO **Gene Ontology** term 

GO_evidence
-----------------
GO **evidence** for gene association

GO_qualifier
-----------------
GO **Qualifier** for relationship between gene and GO term) 

GO_category
-----------------
GO **Category** (Function, Process, or Component) 


------------

gene_info
==================
`tax_id`_ | `GeneID`_ | `Symbol`_ | `LocusTag`_ | `Synonyms`_ | `dbXrefs`_ | `chromosome`_ | `map_loc`_ | `GeneDesc`_ | `GeneType`_ | `Nomen_symbol`_ | `Nomen_source`_ |  `Nomen_status`_ |  `GeneOther`_ |  `LastModified`_

tax_id
-----------------
Unique identifier provided by NCBI **Taxonomy** for the species or strain/isolate

GeneID
-----------------
**HGNC** Unique identifier for a gene (default is HGNC) 

Symbol
-----------------
default symbol for the gene. 
ASN1:  gene->locus           

LocusTag
-----------------
ASN1:  gene->locus-tag

Synonyms 
-----------------
unofficial symbols for the gene

dbXrefs 
-----------------
database:value

chromosome
-----------------
chromosome on which this gene is placed.
for mitochondrial genomes, the value 'MT' is used.

map_loc
-----------------
map location for this gene

GeneDesc
-----------------
descriptive name for this gene

GeneType
-----------------
`Type assigned to the gene according to ENTREZ GENE 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/IEB/ToolBox/CPP_DOC/lxr/source/src/objects/entrezgene/entrezgene.asn>`_

Nomen_symbol
-----------------
Symbol from nomenclature authority
            when not '-', indicates that this symbol is from a
            a nomenclature authority

Nomen_source
-----------------
nomenclature authority
            

Nomen_status
-----------------
status (O for official, I for interim)

GeneOther
---------
pipe-delimited set of some alternate descriptions that
have been assigned to a GeneID
'-' indicates none is being reported.

LastModified
------------
YYYYMMDD format


------------


gene_group
================== 
`tax_id`_ | `GeneID`_ | `relationship`_ | tax_id_other | GeneID_other 
::

   NOTE: This file is not comprehensive, and contains 
   a subset of information summarizing
   gene-gene relationships.  


   Please consider HomoloGene and ProteinClusters
   as additional sources of information.


   ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/HomoloGene/
   ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Bacteria/CLUSTERS/

   Relationships are reported symmetrically, where appropriate, and 
   currently include:

   Ortholog
   Potential readthrough sibling
   Readthrough child
   Readthrough parent
   Readthrough sibling
   Region member
   Region parent
   Related functional gene
   Related pseudogene


relationship 
-----------------
GeneID has a **relationship** to GeneID_other

------------

gene_history
==================
`tax_id`_ |
`GeneID`_ |
`GeneID_old`_  |
`Symbol_old`_ |
`discontinued`_ 

::

   comprehensive information about GeneIDs that are no longer current

GeneID_old 
-----------------
GeneID that is no longer current

Symbol_old
-----------------
symbol that was assigned to the discontinued GeneID

discontinued
-----------------
date gene info was discontinued 


-------------

gene2accession 
================== 
* `tax_id`_
* `GeneID`_
* status 
* R_acc_ver   (**RNA** accession ver) 
* R_acc_gi    (**RNA** accession gi) 
* P_acc_ver   (**Protein** accession ver) 
* P_acc_gi    (**Protein** accession gi) 
* G_acc_ver   (**Genomic** accession ver) 
* G_acc_gi    (**Genomic** accession gi) 
* G_acc_start (**Genomic** accession position **start**) 
* G_acc_end   (**Genomic** accession position **end**) 

::

   Comprehensive report of the accessions that are 
   related to a GeneID.  It includes sequences from the international
   sequence collaboration, Swiss-Prot, and RefSeq. The RefSeq subset
   of this file is also available as gene2refseq.

   Because this file is updated daily, the RefSeq subset does not 
   reflect any RefSeq release. Versions of RefSeq RNA and protein 
   records may be more recent than those included in an annotation
   release (build) or those in the current RefSeq release.

   To identify the annotation release/build to which the 
   genomic RefSeqs belong, please refer to the species-specific
   README_CURRENT_RELEASE or README_CURRENT_BUILD
   file in the genomes ftp site:

   ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/
   http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Sitemap/sequenceIDs.html

   For example:
   ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/H_sapiens/README_CURRENT_RELEASE
   ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Ailuropoda_melanoleuca/README_CURRENT_BUILD            

   More notes about this file:

   tab-delimited
   one line per genomic/RNA/protein set of sequence accessions
   Column header line is the first line in the file.

   NOTE: Because this file is comprehensive, it may include
   some RefSeq accessions that are not current, because they are
   part of the annotation of the current genomic assembly. In other 
   words, the annotation of a genome is not continuous, but depends
   on a data freeze. Sub-genomic RefSeqs, however, are updated 
   continuously. Thus some RefSeqs may have been replaced or 
   suppressed after a data freeze assocated with a genomic annotation. 
   Until the release of a new genomic annotation, all
   RefSeqs that are included in the current annotation are reported
   in this file.

|
gi
----
:: 

   GI number (sometimes written in lower case, "gi") 
   is simply a series of digits that are assigned consecutively 
   to each sequence record processed by NCBI. 

   The GI number bears no resemblance to the 
   Accession number of the sequence record.

|
GeneID_ENS
-----------------
**Ensembl** Unique identifier for a gene

|
assembly
---------------------------------------------------
**assembly** name, or '-' if not applicable

|
status
-----------------
status of the **RefSeq** if a refseq, else '-' 
::

   
   RefSeq values are: INFERRED, MODEL, NA, PREDICTED, PROVISIONAL,
   REVIEWED, SUPPRESSED, VALIDATED

|
R_acc_ver
---------------------------------------------------
**RNA** nucleotide accession *version*. 
may be null (-) for some genomes. 


|
R_acc_gi 
---------------------------------------------------
**RNA** nucleotide accession *gi*. 
'-' if not applicable. 

|
R_acc_ens
---------------------------------------------------
**RNA** Ensembl ID "Ensembl_rna_identifier"

|
P_acc_ver
---------------------------------------------------
**Protein** sequence accession *version*. 
will be null (-) for RNA-coding genes. 

|
P_acc_gi 
---------------------------------------------------
**Protein** accession *gi*. 
'-' if not applicable


|
G_acc_ver
---------------------------------------------------
**Genomic** nucleotide accession *version*. 
will be null (-) for RNA-coding genes. 

|
G_acc_gi 
---------------------------------------------------
**Genomic** nucleotide accession *gi*. 
gi for Genomic nucleotide accession. 
'-' if not applicable. 

|
G_acc_start
---------------------------------------------------
**Genomic** nucleotide accession *start* position. 
'-' if not applicable
position 0-based
:: 

   NOTE: this file does not report the position of each exon.
   For positions on RefSeq contigs and chromosomes, 
   use the seq_gene.md file in the appropriate build directory.
   For example, for the human genome,
   ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/H_sapiens/mapview/

   This file has one line for each annotation, with the feature name, feature_id and
   feature_type columns indicating the name and type of feature. Note that the GeneID 
   value in the feature_id column can be used to find all locations for a gene by GeneID.

   WARNING: Positions in seq_gene.md files are one-based, not 0-based

   NOTE: if genes are merged after an annotation is released, there 
   may be more than one location reported on a genomic sequence 
   per GeneID, each resulting from the annotation before the merge.


|
G_acc_end
---------------------------------------------------
**Genomic** nucleotide accession *end* position.     
'-' if not applicable.  position 0-based.  
SEE: `G_acc_start`_ 


|
orientation
---------------------------------------------------
**Orientation** of the gene feature on the genomic accession,
'?' if not applicable

|
peptide_acc_ver
---------------------------------------------------
**mature peptide** accession version. will be null (-) if absent. 

|
peptide_acc_gi
---------------------------------------------------
**mature peptide** accession version.  will be null (-) if absent


gene2ensembl
======================================
* `tax_id`_
* `GeneID`_      
* `GeneID_ENS`_  (**Ensemble** gene id) 
* `R_acc_ver`_   (**RNA** accession ver) 
* `R_acc_ENS`_   (**RNA** accession gi) 
* `P_acc_ver`_   (**Protein** accession ver) 
* `P_acc_gi`_   (**Protein** accession gi) 

:: 

   This file reports matches between NCBI and Ensembl annotation
   based on comparison of rna and protein features.

   For all organisms, matches are collected as follows.
   For a protein to be identified as a match between RefSeq and
   Ensembl, there must be at least 80% overlap between the two.
   Furthermore, splice site matches must meet certain conditions:
   either 60% or more of the splice sites must match, or there may 
   be at most one splice site mismatch.

   For rna features, the matching criteria are the same as for
   proteins above.  Furthermore, both the rna and the protein features
   must meet these minimum matching criteria to be considered a good
   match.  In addition, only the best matches will be reported in this
   file.  Other matches that satisified the matching criteria but were
   not the best matches will not be reported in this file.

   A summary report of species that have been compared is contained
   in another FTP file, README_ensembl (see next item).

   More notes about this file:

   tab-delimited
   one line per match between RefSeq and Ensembl rna/protein
   Column header line is the first line in the file.


gene_stopwords
======================================
 A list of stopwords that are automatically excluded from searches in Gene.
           


------------ 

| 
|

generifs_basic
======================================
`tax_id`_ | `GeneID`_ | `PMID`_ | LastModified | `GeneRIF`_

::

   GeneRIFs describing a single Gene each
   (rather than interactions between two genes' products)

   Tab-delimited
   Sorted by Tax ID, Gene ID, and the first PubMed ID in the list
   
   http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/GeneRIF/GeneRIFhelp.html


GeneRIF 
-----------------
GeneRIF text string, length <= 425 characters


